---
weight: 203
title: "Basic Food Safety"
description: ""
icon: "article"
date: "2024-06-04T14:42:16-06:00"
lastmod: "2024-06-04T14:42:16-06:00"
draft: true
toc: true
---

## Background

If you eat meat, proper handling of raw meat is vital to protecting the health
and safety of you and anybody eating your food. Raw chicken, beef, pork, or any
other kind of animal flesh carries foodbourne illnesses that can make you
seriously ill and cross-contamination of animal products like raw meat with
other foods meant for consumption is the leading cause of food poisoning. My
goal with this writing is to dispel myths about meat and contamination and give
you the information you need to prepare meat safely at home.

## Basic Food Safety Rules

### Wash Hands And Surfaces Often

Wash your hands and other surfaces like cutting boards regularly with hot soapy
water before and after handling food. If possible, use paper towels to clean
surfaces. If you use cloth towels, wash them frequently in hot water.

Always be sure to rinse fresh produce, even if it has a skin or rind.

### Use a Separate Cutting Board For Raw Meat

Animals and by extension meat are mostly water. When you place raw meat down on
a surface like a countertop or cutting board, the water with all sorts of
harmful foodborne illnesses leaks out onto the surface. If that surface is
porous like wood, the juice will soak into the pores and become impossible to
clean no matter how many times you wipe it down or run it through a dishwaster.
Those pores then become breeding grounds for the harmful bacteria and other
pathogens and contaminate everything else you place on that cutting board in the
future. To avoid this, buy a separate (ideally color-coded) cutting board that
you use exclusively for handling raw meat. Make sure raw meat is the only thing
you handle on that cutting board and that any raw meat is only handled on that
cutting board.

### Cook Foods To A Safe Internal Temperature

Use a food thermometer inserted into the thickest point to measure the internal
temperature of food. When cooking animal products, make sure you bring them to
these corresponding internal temperatures set by the FDA.

{{< table "table-striped" >}} | Meat | Temperature | |---------|--------| |
Beef, Pork, Veal, and Lamb chops/steaks | 145F | | Ground Meat | 160F | | Ham,
Raw | 145F | | Ham, Reheated | 140F | | Poultry | 165F | | Eggs | Until yolk and
white are firm | | Egg Dishes | 160F | | Fish | 145F or until flesh is opaque
and separates easily with fork | | Shrimp, Lobster, Crab | Cook until flesh is
pearly and opaque | | Clams, Oysters, Mussels | Cook until shells open | |
Scallops | Cook until flesh is milky white or opaque and firm | | Leftovers and
Casseroles | 165F |

{{< /table >}}

### Chill Food

Foods not in use should be refrigerated promptly. A refrigerator should maintain
an internal temperature less than 40 degrees and a freezer below 0 degress.
Never thaw frozen foods at room temperature. Always keep marinating food in the
refrigerator.

## Myths About Food Safety

### "Washing" Meat

Washing meat by rinsing it in running water or soaking it in saltwater, vinegar,
lemon juice, or another acid does not effectively sanitize meat. Washing meats
is not recommended by the US FDA or USDA and will only serve to spread foodborne
illness like salmonella from raw meat to other foods, utensils, or surfaces.
Cooking meat to a sufficient internal temperature is the only way to kill
foodborne pathogens. This is not the same as brining or marinating chicken for
flavor.

### "The 24-Hour Flu"

If you heard a lot about the "24-hour flu" growing up, it's not real. That term
actually refers to gastroenteritis, typically caused either by norovirus or
rotavirus which are spread through ingesting the feces of an infected person.
This happens most frequently when proper food hygiene practices, especially
washing produce, are not carried out.

### Medium-Rare Chicken

Do not.

###
